---
layout: post
title: Tasks automation in Swift with Sake
excerpt: In this post I introduce a new tool I've been working on Sake. Sake is the Swift version of Make. It allows you to automate tasks in your projects.
tags: [sake, swift, swift, xcproj, xcode.swift]
comments: true
image:
  feature: headers/beyonce.jpg
  credit: Pedro Piñera
sitemap   :
  priority : 0.9
  isfeatured : 1
---

In the past are those days when you automated your tasks using Make, Rake or Fastlane. These tools provided an interface an tools to automate certain tasks in our projects. Each of them had their own strenghts and weaknesses. If we take Make for instance, it requires some bash knowledge, but on the other side it is more robust than the other solution *(it does't depend on anything that is not in your system)*. Rake or Fastlane made the definition of our tasks easier using a more readable language like Ruby, but they required to install some dependencies. Fastlane for example comes with some dependencies that need to be installed in the system using Ruby gems.

While those tools made our lives easier as developers, I felt we could leverage Swift and its types to automate tasks, using Xcode and its editor to build and test our tasks easily. I started to work on the Swift version of Make that I'm pleased to introduce in this post, [Sake](https://github.com/xcodeswift/sake). It's in a very early stage but ready to be used. I'm eager to get feedback from you and improve the tool with your help. Please don't hesitate to contribute with the repo or propose ideas!

## Why Sake? ❓

I'm a Swift/Objective-C developer and I'm very used to work with compilers that catch any issues with the types in our code. Types are a very powerful tool and used properly can make our apps safer bringing a lot of confidence to the developer. In most of the projects that I've been involved, either open or closed source, the automation was mainly done using bash or Ruby and tools like Rake or Fastlane. Many times I've been myself trying to debug failing lanes or tasks using `pry` in Ruby or printing stuff in the console to analyze the execution of the task. Sometimes these issues happened on CI and I spent a lot of time debugging them until I could figure out where the issue was coming from. Does it sound familiar to you?

I read about how Swift Package Manager works and saw that [Danger](http://danger.systems/) did something similar. After some grooming I realized it was feasible to build a Swift Make where the definition of the tasks would be in a Swift file. What I liked about the idea is the fact that developers would be able to write the scripts in a language they are familiar with. They don't need to know about the Ruby syntax, or how to debug Ruby execution. Moreover they could use an IDE like Xcode that they are very used to. The tool would facilitate testing and composition by allowing developers to separate their tasks in multiple `.swift` files that are part of the same module:

{% highlight swift %}
// Sakefile
import SakefileDescription
import SakefileUtils

enum Task: String, CustomStringConvertible {
  case build
  var description: String {
    switch self {
      case .build:
        return "Builds the project"
    }
  }
}

Sake<Task> {
  $0.task(.build) { (utils) in
    // Here is where you define your build task
  }
}.run()
{% endhighlight %}

## How it works 👩🏻‍💻

Sake is based on the same Swift Package Manager foundation but with some subtle differences. In case of Swift Package Manager, the tool compiles your `Package.swift` file exporting the variable as a [TOML](https://github.com/toml-lang/toml) file *(a format similar to json yet more human-readable)*. Afterward, they parse that TOML file and map it into models that define the structure of your project.

> If you are interested in reading more about that, I'd recommend you to check out this [blogpost]() that explains it further.

In case of Sake it doesn't need to generate any toml file since the tasks are not value properties but closures that contain the actions. Rather, Sake compiles the file passing some arguments that are used by the `Sake` class to determine what needs to be done *(e.g. list all the tasks, or run a particular task)*. [This class](https://github.com/xcodeswift/sake/blob/master/Sources/SakeKit/RunSakefile.swift#L34) contains all the logic that compiles and runs the `Sakefile.swift` file. 

> Notice that we need to pass some flags that specify where the libraries are. This is very important, otherwise the compiler will throw an error when you try to compile the `Sakefile.swift` because it doesn't know where to import the `SakefileDescription` library from.

## How to use it 🤔

#### Install the tool 📦

First of all you need to install the tool. You can easily do it with Homebrew:

{% highlight bash %}
brew tap xcodeswift/sake git@github.com:xcodeswift/sake.git
brew install sake
{% endhighlight %}

> Notice that you have to add the repository tap. A tap in Homebrew is a repository that contains formulas, and formulas are Ruby classes that specify how to install a given tool. I plan to add the formulat to the official Homebrew tap so that you don't have to add any external tap, but it's pending task to do.

#### Generate your Sakefile.swift 📝

Once you have the tool installed you should be able to run the following command from the console:

{% highlight bash %}
sake init
{% endhighlight %}

`sake init` will generate a base `Sakefile.swift` in the current directory where you can start defining your tasks.

> Notice that `Sake` is a generic class where the type must be an enum that contains all possible tasks. That makes the definition of your tasks more type-safe since you can define dependencies between tasks by passing the type rather than a string with its name.

#### Generate the Xcode project ⚙

You can edit the file above using any text editor. That's a good thing to do if you want to practise how familiar you are with the Swift syntax and `Foundation` APIs but is that something that you'd like to practise? What if we could use Xcode and benefit from the syntax highlighting and the code autocompletion that the IDE offers? What if I told you that Sake can help you with that?

Run the following command in the console:

{% highlight bash %}
sake generate-xcodeproj
{% endhighlight %}

The command will generate a `Sakefile.xcpdeproj` project in the directory where the `Sakefile.swift` is. The project contains a command-line-tool target with your `Sakefile.swift` and the linking settings necessary for Xcode to recognize the tool libraries.

> :warning: Xcode expect command-line-tool targets to contain a `main.swift` file that is the entry point of the command line tool. That's an implicit value that we can't change. If you try to compile the scheme you'll see that Xcode complains because you cannot run code at the top level in files other than the `main.swift` file. Ignore the error since it will work when the `Sakefile.swift` is run by Sake.

#### Running tasks ✅

Running tasks is very easy. You just need to run the following command where `name` is the name of the task:

{% highlight bash %}
sake task name
{% endhighlight %}

That would run the task erroring if the task failed *(by throwing a Swift error)*. Sake also provides a command that you can use to print all the available tasks:

{% highlight bash %}
sake tasks
{% endhighlight %}

## One more thing... 🍎

### Hooks

Sake supports hooks that allow you to define code that will be executed before or after of each or all the tasks:


{% highlight swift %}
// Sakefile
Sake<Task> {
  $0.beforeEach {
    // Do something
  }
  $0.afterAll {
    // Do something
  }
}.run()
{% endhighlight %}


### Utils

When tasks or hooks are created the closure takes an object that contains some utils that are provided by Sake. The utils that are currently provided are:
- **Git** Util to interact with git *(e.g get last tag, current branch, commit changes)*
- **Shell:** Util to run tasks in the shell.
- **Http:** Synchronous API client that supports JSON parsing.

In the example below you can see how the utils are used to automate the release process of Sake:

{% highlight swift %}
let branch = "release/1.0.0"
try utils.git.createBranch(branch)
try utils.shell.runAndPrint(bash: "swift build")
try utils.git.addAll()
try utils.git.commitAll(message: "[\(branch)] Bump version")
try utils.git.tag(version)
try utils.git.push(remote: "origin", branch: branch, tags: true)
{% endhighlight %}

## Limitations 😅
Although the tool is completely functional there are some important limitations that are worth consiering:

- **Swift and ABI stability:** When the tool is  intalled in your system it compiles some libraries with the version of Swift that you have currently installed. Due to the fact that Swift doesn't have ABI stability yet, you'll only be able to use Sake with that version of Swift. As soon as you upgrade the version of Swift that you use in your system the tool will stop working. You'll have to either reinstall the tool, or use a tool like [Mint](https://github.com/yonaskolb/mint) that allows you to run Swift Package Manager command line tools building them when it's necessary. Apple is working on the ABI stability so we can expect this to be fixed soon. 
- **Xcode and main.swift:** As you might have noticed when you edit your `Sakefile.swift` with Xcode it doesn't actually compile because we cannot run Swift code at the top level in a file other than a `main.swift`. However, Xcode editor features like code autocompletion or syntax highlighting seem to be working greatly. I've tried several things like creating a temporary `main.swift` with a symbolic link to the `Sakefile.swift` but I couldn't get it working. If you have any idea of how this could be solved I'd love to hear about it.

## Upcoming features 🤗
Sake is in a very early state ad I'm eager to get feedback from you to improve tool. Some of ideas that are in the backlog are:

- **Support modules:** Right now all the tasks code needs to be defined in the `Sakefile.swift`. That can eventually result in a large and complex file pretty quickly. The idea of modules is to support developers to define their code in multiple Swift files under the `/Project/Sake` folder. All the files in that folder would be part of the same module, and thus visible to each other.
- **Facilitate testing:** One thing that I found developers barely do with automation code is testing. The code is mostly written in a build-and-try manner. I'd love Sake to change that and encourage developers to test their automation code as well. Sake would allow developers define their implement their tests in a new module and run them using Xcode.
- **Officially Homebrew formula:** You might have noticed that in order to install the tool you need to tap the repository. That is necessary because the tool formula is not part of the Homebrew formulas repository yet. As soon as the tool becomes mature enough I'll make a proposal to include the formula in the official Homebrew formulas repository.
- **Improve/Add utils:** Sake comes with some basic utils to facilitate common tasks. The goal of Sake is not to solve everyone's problems providing a large amount of utils but to ease automation with as few utils as possible. As soon as developers start using Sake I'll see if we need to reconsider the APIs of some of them or maybe introduce new utils.
- `SakefileDescription` versioning: The library that contains Sake DSL which is used to describe the tasks in the `Sakefile.swift` is versioned together with `Sake`. If developers want to use a new version of Sake that comes with a new description syntax, they are forced to update their `Sakefile.swift`. Having a different versioning for `SakefileDescription` will allow developers to update to the latest version of `Sake` without having to update their `Sakefile.swift` file. We'll most likely implement it in the same way the Swift Package Manager does it, by adding a comment line at the top that specifies the version of the `SakefileDescription` that needs to be useed.

---

I hope you liked this introductory blogpost. Can't wait to see how you use the tool and the ideas you come up with. Sake is part of [xcode.swift](https://github.com/xcodeswift), an open source organization on GitHub that aims to build open source tools written in Swift to facilitate developers work when working with Xcode. If you are interested in contributing don't hesitate to do it, there's a Slack channel that you are invited to [join](http://xcodeswift.herokuapp.com/) and talk to other contributors.