---
layout: post
title: Random thoughts a Friday night in Ottawa
excerpt: A retrospective on what 2017 has been
tags: [2017, retro, year]
comments: true
image:
  feature: headers/2017.jpg
  credit: Photo by Pedro Piñera
sitemap   :
  priority : 0.9
  isfeatured : 1
---

It's January 19th and I'm right now in Canada. It's been a very exciting beginning of the year, starting with my onboarding at Shopify. I had forgotten how it feels to start a new job, with a lot of tools and processes to learn, and a lot of people to meet. It requires a lot of energy, and I tend to overwhelm, but I'm trying to take it easily this time, step by step. What excites me the most about joining this new company is that I'll be able to dive deeper into how to make developers productive working on mobile codebases. I've been learning at lot about it in the last couple of years, and I love building tools to make developers' life easier. Shopify has a team for that I'm glad to be part of it. I'm excited about all the stuff that I'll have the opportunity to learn here.

This post is somehow special. I couldn't come up with a name that summarizes what I'm going to write about *(because I don't actually know)*, but I just wanted to write down some thoughts which have been in my head for quite some time. Do you know these moments in life when you ask yourself so many questions and they don't allow you to see any light at all? That's sort of how I'm feeling. Profesionally speaking, I've had a very intense career since I became developer. I self-taught myself most of the stuff that I know nowadays. That requires being very active, reading a lot of books and tutorials, using the social networks very actively, specially Twitter when you can get the most recent tech news, getting involved in open source projects and working on your own. Sometimes I was like a horse, I was moving fast, but I didn't have time to deeply enjoy the journey. That moment when you can sit back, relax, and celebrate your achievements. My achievements quickly faded away because I was already thinking about the next step in the journey. I think this goes pretty much with my personality, and the people that know me well, will most likely agree on that. I'm working a lot to slow down my life, but I'm finding it very hard. A side of me says that I should stop it, because otherwise I'll run into troubles soon, the other side tells me that I should continue because that's the only way to be successful in life. It's like having a devil and an angel on your shoulders pushing you to completely opposite directions. That's my daily dilemma.

I'd love to slow down, and have more focus in my life. Moving fast with no focus brings me stress and anxiety. It makes me feel bad with myself and with the people around me. I don't want that. I want to feel good and enjoy my work and the people around me. It's hard, isn't it? I don't know if you have ever been in that situation but I struggle to make another version of me. As a consequence, things that I used to like, I don't enjoy them anymore. I used to run a lot, but a lot. It was my mindfulness moment of the day. When I ran, I didn't think about anything, I focused on my breathing, my steps, the things around me. Nowadays, when I go out for running, I keep thinking about my everyday struggles. They are with me all the day long. It's so exhausting that I don't like running anymore. It's not running, it's me. I go to the cinema, I spend some time with the family, and the horse Pedro continues looking straight and moving. I don't know another way to describe it better but I think the horse metaphor is very representative.

There are a lot of great resources out there with people talking about similar struggles. We live in a very competitive environment, with insane amount of information being thrown to us every day. We sometimes push us so hard, because we think that the only thing we need in our live is success. We want to have the best job, a great recognition, and be the expert on some given areas. We are surrounded with such positiveness, that we demand us more than what we should. And to me, it's not surprising that such thing happens. You open Medium and you find tons of articles titled like "X ways to be successful in Y". You open Instagram, or Twitter, and everyone is so happy and has a great life that they become a source of inspiration for you. You lose personality, you want to meditate because person X said that meditation is what makes him/her a happy person, you want the new thing Y because you saw on Instagram a lot of people are enjoying that thing. I've been there, I'm still there, and sometimes I have zero time to listen myself, to hear my feelings, to reflect on my thoughts, to understand what motivates me or what doesn't. I just let myself be influenced by the competitive and overwhelming environment. **Isn't it sad?**

One thing that I'm currently doing to help me get some focus is decluttering my life. I'm getting rid of all the things that I don't need, and which don't add anything other than noise. There's a buzzword for that, [Minimalism](https://www.theminimalists.com/minimalism/), but it's not something that has been recently invented. People were minimalists in the past. They had all they needed to have a happy and quiet life. Before the capitalism and the Internet revolution people cared more about each others and themselves *(something that we are losing more and more nowadays)*. Anyways, that's another interesting discussion topic. Simplifying one's life is not only about materialistic elements but also non-materialistic ones. I'm getting rid of the gadgets that I don't need in my life, replacing the expensive ones with a cheaper version *(I'm replacing my iPhone with a cheap Xiaomi more than enough for my needs)*. Closing the accounts that I don't use, leaving Slack organizations in which I don't participate, reducing the tools that I use, leaving only the ones that are indispensable. I shut down my Instagram account, and cleaned up my Facebook's one. I'd love to close it as well but I find the events section very useful, specially when you live abroad. I have a list of clothes that I'm going to give away, and stuff that I'm going to sell in second hand Facebook groups.

Getting rid of the stuff that I don't need it's making me feel more relaxed. I don't have to think about these things anymore, I can open the laptop and have just the few apps that I need, and not a bunch of apps with badges trying to catch my attention. I have more time to read, to learn languages, to learn new technologies, without any distraction at all. It feels great, and overall, I have time to think about myself. Maybe that's what made me sit down and start writing this post today. Ideally, I'd like my life to be a continuous technology detox, where I can control when it's time to think about technology. I'd like to read more, and I don't mean tweets, or Medium articles, I mean proper books. Wake up, and with a relaxed mind, start reading and don't feel that the time is passing. Read pages without thinking about any notification coming in, or meetings in the calendar waiting for your attention. I think the last time I had that feeling was in high school, where there was no phone, or distractions to think about. Don't you miss them as well?

Minimalism is giving me time and space to think selfishly about me, about this horse that has been moving fast for some months/years. There's something that is coming up every time that I stop to reflect on myself, and it's the impact the work I'm doing has. Open sourcing used to be my mean to help people giving them some piece of software that they could use to build software with good intentions. It felt good helping other developers, talking to them and iterating the projects, but at some point I came across the reality. It's a competitive industry, where not many people want to share efforts towards making good open source tools, but rather, individually work on their own. I found out that communities in open source are rarely communities, they are just a bunch of people working with the same programming language, reading the same articles, and watching the same videos, but with different interests in the end. It was for me hard to understand why there was such a polemic in the [CocoaPods](https://cocoapods.org) team when there was another dependency management tool coming out, [Carthage](https://github.com/carthage). I undersand their position much better now. That's what I meant with communities formed by individuals with different interests, rather than shared interests. That disappointed me a lot. For me, one of the charming things about open source software is sharing efforts with other people and working together towards the same goals. In the competitive society where we live nowadays, it's becoming impossible, and I can't believe I'd say this but, I'm not as motivated as I was before working on open source projects.

I've also been there myself. I've mistakenly built projects thinking own my own interests. Core Data wrappers, Xcode project parsers... I've contributed towards making everyone more confused, and adding some fragmentation. I feel very bad about it. Interests in open source communities result in fragmentation, and we see it everywhere: [Buck](https://buckbuild.com/) & [Bazel](https://bazel.build/), [Yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/en/) & [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/). When open source projects are driven by corporations the problem is even worse, because corporations have very strong interests. If you take Apple for instance, which has been doing more open source lately, the ultimate decision when it comes to planning the future of the Swift language is made by Apple. We can discuss if the community has more or less voice, but Apple and its engineers make the final call.

I'd like to contribute to open source projects that are driven by the community, with no interests at all, and with good human values as a foundation. Projects with some meaningful impact for developers and non-developers. It'll be hard to find any, but I think that it'll be easier in programming languages that are mainly driven by the community, like Javascript or Ruby. These programming languages have a very mature ecosystem, community, and tooling and they have a more solid foundation of values. Given that Ruby is the main programming language in Shopify I think it's a great opportunity for me to get more involved in the Ruby community and find an open source project that I'd feel motivated contributing to. It's been a few years with Swift and iOS and I feel it's the right moment for a change. What also motivates me the most about Ruby is how easy it is to run Ruby code in almost any operating system and how mature the community is.


// Ego free environments
// Discipline