---
layout: post
title: Scaling your Xcode projects with Buildify
# excerpt: It's been a long time since the last time I coded something on Ruby. In this blog post I talk about why I started using it again, and how it feels after spending a few years working with a compiled language like Swift.
tags: [technology, detox, disconnection]
comments: true
comments-issue-number: 15
image:
  feature: headers/hallo-ruby.jpg
  credit: Photo by ORNELLA BINNI on Unsplash
sitemap   :
  priority : 1.0
  isfeatured : 1
---

Today I'm pleased to announce a project I've been working on the last months, [Buildify](https://buildify.io). I've been developing apps using Xcode since 2010 and I've come across many issues when using it at scale. Xcode is a great IDE, with very useful built-in features that make developers life easier, however when projects and teams grow, having a lot of devleopers contributing to the cosebase every day, it becomes very hard to work with it. We like to say that we reached that point when developers spend more time fighting the tools than building features.

I found scaling Xcode projects and teams a very exciting area full of challenges to be addressed, and I've devoted a lot of my time to explore how other companies are coping with it and what we can do to overcome it. Modularizing code bases is for instance a good example of how you can scale your code base, but it's not enough. Having modules and dependencies defined in Xcode projects and targets comes with a high maintenance cost. Moreover, setting up projects, targets, and workspaces is a very manual and error-prone process. For example, a framework wrongly linked from one of the dependencies, could result in compilation errors hard to track down.

Certificates management or build times are another two good examples of issues that arise when Xcode projects are used at scale. Although there've been a few attempts from Apple to improve certificates management, like adding the automated signing, it's been adopted as the magic button that solves my signing issues. It's something great for the developer experience, but doesn't solve the problem at all. There's no such magic button when you build your apps for release from your CI pipelines. On the other side, Swift compiler improvements is helping with the slow compile time issues. However, nowadays apps are considerably bigger than what they were a few years ago, and those compiler improvements are not perceived at all. Facebook and Google had to replace Xcode build system  with their own in-house solutions, Buck and Bazel because they realized that a lot of developers time was being spent on compiling the apps. 

I decided to work on **Buildify** to tackle most of the issues mentioned before. Buildify aims to abstract developers from Xcode projects and its maintenance, and improve build times. To do so, it leverages project generation and caching. When a developer generates or builds a project, Buildify tries to use pre-compiled binaries for those dependencies that didn't change and the developer doesn't have plans to work on.


---





Buildify includes a macOS application to quickly interact  with your projects, and also a command line tool that you can use from your terminal or continuous  integration  environment. If you'd like to give it a try, you can download it from its official website, [buildify.com](https://buildify.com). You'll have a 15 days trial so that you can try the app before deciding for getting a license for you or your team. Don't hesitate to reach out to me via email at [pepibumur@gmail.com](mailto://pepibumur@gmail.com) to share with me any feedback, idea,  or issue you came across with you. If you are experiencing some frustration when working with your projects and you'd like to know how Buildify could help you with that I'm happy to help you and have a chat about it.
