---
layout: post
title: Wrapping up 2018 📦
excerpt: A retrospective on what 2018 has been
tags: [2018, retro, year]
comments: true
image:
  feature: headers/2017.jpg
  credit: Photo by Pedro Piñera
sitemap   :
  priority : 0.9
  isfeatured : 1
---

It's been almost 365 days since I made a similar reflection on 2017. This time is the turn for 2018, a year with significant changes in my life, new countries that I visited for the first time, and some ups and downs that made me stronger and helped me grow as a person. In this blog post, I'd like to reflect on some remarkable things that happened to me this year.

## 🛒 Shopify
I started the year by joining the mobile tooling team at [Shopify](https://shopify.com). Having done iOS development for the last 4 years, this was a shift in my career, where developers became my users and I'd write Rails and Ruby instead of Swift. During this year, I was part of the design and development of internal tools that are used across the mobile teams at the company. Moreover, my Ruby code, which originally looked pretty much like Swift, improved a lot. Also, I got to learn more about Rails, which we use to build an internal website that I'm looking forward to telling you more about soon. 

I've also learnt a lot about how to work with a remote team. Working remotely was an exciting thing that I had read a lot, however, I was not fully aware of all the challenges that it comes with. I feel I'm better at communicating and coordinating work with the rest of my team.

In retrospective, this was great step in my career and I can't wait to continue to learn and grow.

## 🧠 Psychologist
As I already wrote about on my ["What a psychologist helped me realize"](/2018/10/06/what-psychologist-helped-me-realize) blog post, I went through some issues related to stress and anxiety. I was not balancing my time well and I was putting too much time and energy onto work-related stuff. Besides my full-time job, I was doing open source, side projects, writing blog posts. I ended up losing motivation for things that I used to like a lot, like doing sport. Everything that I did outside work, had to do with work in some way or another. I read books related to software engineering, I talked to my friends about stuff that I did at work...

I wasn't until I got some professional help, when I realized how badly I was managing my time. Moreover I learned about the importance of being assertive, setting expectations, defining short-term goals and celebrating often.

Although I struggle a bit nowadays, it got much better. I'm more aware and present about my feelings and take more time to make more thorough decisions. Getting professional help is something that I'd recommend to anyone feeling mentally or emotionally unstable. Our brains are a mistery and we'd better be taught about how they work.

## :heart: Relationship
//TODO

## ✈️ New countries

I had the opportunity to visit 3 countries for the first time:

- **Canada 🇨🇦:** I flew there for the first time for the Shopify interviews. Since then, I've been in Canada several times along the year and visited cities like Ottawa, Montreal and Toronto.
- **Latvia 🇱🇻:** Despite being not that far from Berlin, I had never in Latvia before. I visited it to attend the [DevTernity conference](https://devternity.com/) with some friends.
- **Macedonia 🇲🇰:** I went on a 4-day trip with Maria José to celebrate my birthday. We rented a car and drove from Skopje to the beautiful Ohrid, and from there to Thessaloniki, northern Greece.

## 📣 Conferences
In 2017, I took a break from attending and speaking at conferences. Moreover, with the other organizers of [ADDC](https://addconf.com), we made the decision for me to step down as organizer. It was a great experience during the two years that I was involved, and I'm glad the event ran successfully. I'm sure the event will continue to grow and be ahead of innovation.

After this year-long break I feel with more energy and motivated to prepare a talk for a conference. We've built some internal tools at Shopify to overcome some scalability challenges so I might prepare the talk around that topic.

## 🇩🇪 German
I set learning German as a goal for 2018 and I think I miserably failed at it. First of all, I think it was a mistake to define *"learn German"* as a goal. What's learning German? Being proficient? Being able to have a casual conversation or make a phone call? Since learning languages is not something that I particularly like, I kept procrastinating and leaving my lessons for later. As a consequence, I kept running into awkward situations where I needed to talk to someone in German and I didn't know how to say a word. One side of me things that I should speak the language because I don't know for how long I will be in the country, the other side of me says that I should rather put my energy into something that really motivates me.

I feel very bad because I think that as a person living in Germany, I should speak the language of the country. Living in a globalized world is great, but I shouldn't disregard the beauty of having different cultures and languages and thus, I should strive to keep them.

## 🏃‍♂️ Exercise
I'm not very proud of how I've been exercising this year. The first half of the year I got a personal trainer to help me prepare the marathon in Berlin, which unfortunately, I had to abandon after some pain in my muscles. After that, I haven't trained regularly, barely one or twice a week. Moreover, I got some extra kilos which I'm struggling get off my body. I'd like to get back the motivation that I had two years ago, when I was exercising 4 times a week, but I don't know how.

I've been thinking about this a lot, and I think that I just need to find a running buddy that can workout with. Two years ago I was mostly working out with my flat-mate. When I was not feeling motivated, he was the source of motivation. When he wasn't, I was the source. Moreover, I wasn't putting to much energy into work so it was easier for me to stop thinking about work and enjoy the moment of going for a run.

## 🥅 Goals for 2019 

- **Nurture other areas of my life:**