I've been wanting to try [Bazel](https://bazel.build/) for quite a long time. For those of you that don't know what Bazel is, I think Google describes it very well: *Build and test software of any size, quickly and reliably*. It's a scalable build system that can be used with different programming languages and platforms *(like iOS and Android)* and that some companies are using to speed up the builds.

I'm particularly interested in the iOS side of things. When Swift was announced, a lot of companies and projects started using it. The compiler wasn't mature enought and that resulted in huge compilation times. That's something Apple has been improving gradually but if your project is large, you reach a point where there's  no more margin for improvement. Something that you can do to *"avoid"* the compiler, and speed up your team work is using the Javascript interpreter and React Native. Although this alternative might not suitable for all the projects, for some it's working well. At Shopify for instance, with a lot of iOS software engineers, very familiar with Swift and Xcode, and reusing modules across multiple apps, doing such change would be unconceivable.

Bazel can help with that! The first time that I heard about an iOS app using it was during Mobiconf 2017 where I had the opportunity to meet [Rahul](https://twitter.com/rmalik), an amazing iOS engineer working at Pinterest that was involved in the transition to Bazel. He told me how they adopted the tool and how engineers using it internally and it was mind-blowing. Some of the features that resonated with me the most what the fact that it **supported incremental adoption**, and that it **is very extensible using a language similar to Python**. The former is important when you introduce such thing in a existing codebase. You don't want to change overnight the build system that engineers use but rather, introduce it gradually to see how it feels, and if it integrates well into evelopers workflow. The second is something that I missed a lot from Xcode. The only flexibility that you have in Xcode projects to customize your builds is build phases, which are very restrictive. I think having something similar to Gradle is important at some point when your project grows, because you need to customize steps, and optimize things that didn't require any optimization before.

> Buck has a lot of similarities with Buck, the build system that Facebook built and open source and that [Uber](https://uber.com) and [Airbnb](https://airbnb.com) are using.

My goal in this post is to give it a try and see if I'm able to create an iOS app with a few modules that contain only Swift code. I won't add any resources such as Storyboards, XIBs, or Images *(that could probably be a second experimentation)*. Moreover, I'll generate Xcode projects based on the Bazel configuration and see if it integrates well with the development workflow we are used to *(editing and compiling from Xcode)*. There we go!

> I'm not sure if I'll manage to get it working cause the compatibility of those build systems with Swift is not as good as with Objective-C. If that's the case, I'll share why it's not possible and how far are we from having version that works with it.

