---
layout: post
title: I do have weaknesses too
excerpt: A retrospective on what 2018 has been
tags: [2018, retro, year]
comments: true
image:
  # feature: headers/2018.jpg
  credit: Photo by Pedro Piñera
sitemap   :
  priority : 0.9
  isfeatured : 1
---

I'm a person that observes and reflects a lot on the things that I do *(sometimes too much)*, which helps me become a better person, boyfriend, co-worker and social person... This is is a tough exercise because I sometimes face uncomfortable truths that I disregarded for a long time. Maybe, because I didn't want to accept them or because I was not aware of any harm they'd cause later on in my life. 

At some point, ignoring them goes no further because they start impacting my life in other ways. For example, I've been a **competitive person** since I was young. Being competitive is good, but taken to an extreme it makes things horrible. It brings me anxiety because I'm always trying to find a better version of myself, or better than the people around me, and that's not always possible. The same competitiveness that allowed me to get excellent grades at the University, wants me to run faster, longer distances, or be smarter every single day. My life ends up being race with myself and with others. Insane, isn't it?

I'm this blog post I'd like to talk through some of those **weaknesses** that I've found in my personality, mostly in the context of work and open source. Some of you might think that I'm crazy sharing weaknesses on the Internet, a place where we barely talk about those things, but I believe we should do it more often, and fight the status quo of Internet being a place where everyone needs to make up a persona. I don't want you to read about my a made-up persona that looks perfect, I want you to know me, Pedro Piñera. A person with strengths and weaknesses who opens himself to others by sharing his thoughts, experiences, and work.

I'll start off by talking about my competitiveness. As I mentioned, it's not necessarily bad, but I take it to an extreme sometimes.


<!-- I kept those truths for myself and barely shared them with anyone. -->


### Making anyone feel part of